# Fall 2023 Paleomagnetism Seminar

Tuesday (1:30 to 3:00 pm) in McCone 401

| Meeting Date | Reading/Prep | Discussion leader |
|--------------|--------------|-------------------|
|08/29/23| First meeting organization and APWP synthesis discussion *discussion of Gallo et al. 2023* | Nick |
|09/05/23| Rotation of the Colorado Plateau *discussion of Bryan and Gordon (1986, 1990)*  https://doi.org/10.1029/TC005i004p00661 and https://doi.org/10.1029/GL017i010p01501 *could also look at Steiner (1986):* https://doi.org/10.1029%2Ftc005i004p00649 | Yiming |
|09/12/23| Kulakov et al. (2021) Jurassic fast polar shift rejected by a new high-quality paleomagnetic pole from southwest Greenland https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2021.05.021 | Diego |
|09/19/23| Global APWP (discussion of: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2023.104547) and APWP-online.org (*discussion of Vaes et al. preprint*:  https://doi.org/10.31223/X5WD44) | Facu |
|09/26/23| Cretaceous–Paleogene magnetostratigraphy (discussion of Fuentes et al. 2019: [https://doi.org/10.24872/rmgjournal.54.2.133](https://doi.org/10.24872/rmgjournal.54.2.133))| Anthony |
|10/03/23| Work on Fuentes et al. data compilation for Mesozoic APWP https://github.com/PolarWandering/Mesozoic_APWP | Everyone |
|10/10/23| GSA practice talk | Leah |
|10/17/23| Work on data compilation |  |
|10/24/23| Work on iron oxide raman spectra processing |  |
|10/31/23|  |  |
|11/07/23| Mesozoic drift of the Wrangellia superterrane revisited: the way forward from paleomagnetic data https://eartharxiv.org/repository/view/5906/ | Goran Andjic (visiting researcher from University of Lausanne) |
|11/14/23|  bChron/Chron.jl; Haslett, J. and Parnell, A. (2008), A simple monotone process with application to radiocarbon-dated depth chronologies. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series C (Applied Statistics), 57: 399-418. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9876.2008.00623.x; Parnell et al. 2008, A flexible approach to assessing synchroneity of past events using Bayesian reconstructions of sedimentation history, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2008.07.009; Keller, C.B. (2018). Chron.jl: A Bayesian framework for integrated eruption age and age-depth modelling. https://doi.org/10.17605/osf.io/TQX3F; https://mfr.osf.io/render?url=https://osf.io/739qm/?direct%26mode=render%26action=download%26mode=render&_gl=1*lw0ihb*_ga*MjEyMDkyNzk0NS4xNjk3NTc1Nzk3*_ga_YE9BMGGWX8*MTY5NzU3NTc5Ny4xLjEuMTY5NzU3NTk0NC42MC4wLjA. ; Schoene et al. (2019), U-Pb constraints on pulsed eruption of the Deccan Traps across the end-Cretaceous mass extinction. Science 363,862-866. DOI:10.1126/science.aau2422 | Facu gives executive summary of Haslett and Parnell (2008); Nick gives executive of Parnell et al. (2008); Yiming gives executive summary of Keller (2018); Anthony gives executive summary of Schoene et al. 2019 |
|11/21/23|  |  |
|11/28/23| Nick out of town giving UCLA seminar |  |
|12/05/23| Leandro in town |  |
|12/12/23| AGU week |  |

Other Colorado Plateau rotation papers that we could discuss:

- Muttoni, G., & Kent, D. V. (2019). Jurassic monster polar shift confirmed by sequential paleopoles from Adria, promontory of Africa. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124, 3288–3306. https://doi.org/10.1029/ 2018JB017199 This paper both presents data from Adria and also calls into question Colorado Plateau data from the Morrison Formation: "*we show from a restudy of two subdivisions of the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation at the classic locality at Norwood on the Colorado Plateau that the derived paleopoles reflect variable overprinting probably in the Cretaceous and are of limited value for apparent polar wander determination.*"
- Steiner, M. B., and Lucas, S. G. (2000), Paleomagnetism of the Late Triassic Petrified Forest Formation, Chinle Group, western United States: Further evidence of “large” rotation of the Colorado Plateau, J. Geophys. Res., 105(B11), 25791–25808, https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JB900093. *Argues for a larger rotation that Bryan and Gordon (1990) of 9±3°*
- Muttoni, G., & Kent, D. V. (2019). Jurassic monster polar shift confirmed by sequential paleopoles from Adria, promontory of Africa. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 124, 3288–3306. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JB017199 *one aspect of this paper is that they make the argument that: *We show with new data that the widely used paleomagnetic poles from the Morrison Formation of the Colorado Plateau are overprinted*
- Molina Garza, R. S. M., Acton, G. D., and Geissman, J. W. (1998), Carboniferous through Jurassic paleomagnetic data and their bearing on rotation of the Colorado plateau, J. Geophys. Res., 103(B10), 24179–24188, https://doi.org/10.1029/98JB02053. *Small, yet systematic, differences between paleomagnetic poles derived from strata on the Colorado plateau and paleopoles determined from rocks on the North America craton have been interpreted to support the hypothesis of modest post-Late Cretaceous clockwise rotation of the plateau, as a quasi-rigid body, with respect to the craton. Using an iterative search for the best fit Euler pole and rotation angle, comparison of the best quality Late Carboniferous through Late Jurassic paleomagnetic poles from the Colorado plateau and the North America craton gives a cumulative rotation estimate (based on a rotation pole at 34°N, 105°W) of 7.4°±3.8° (95% confidence limits). A similar comparison using subsets of the cratonic database from localities in (1) northeast North America and (2) the craton platform interior give larger (8.8°±3.6°) and smaller (5.1°±3.8°) estimates, respectively, reflecting the fact that poles from localities in northeast North America, in particular those from Triassic rift basins, indicate a larger rotation (as concluded in direct pole to pole comparisons). The Euler pole, as determined by the paleomagnetic data only, can lie anywhere within a relatively large area that encompasses locations in the western United States previously proposed from geological observations. Paleomagnetic data and geologic observations, together or independently, do not support the hypothesis of a large Colorado plateau rotation (of 11° to 15°). If geologically reasonable, previous estimates of significant (>∼20 km) dextral slip along the eastern margin of the plateau require a position for the Euler pole east of the 105°W meridian.*
- Kent, D. V., and Witte, W. K. (1993), Slow apparent polar wander for North America in the Late Triassic and large Colorado Plateau rotation, Tectonics, 12(1), 291–300, doi:10.1029/92TC01966. *Several recent analyses of North American paleomagnetic data suggest fast apparent polar wander (APW) (∼0.75°/m.y.) during the Late Triassic and a modest amount (∼5°) of Colorado Plateau clockwise rotation. Paleomagnetic poles from the lower (Carnian), middle (Norian), and upper (Hettangian) stratigraphic intervals of the Newark Basin, however, indicate very slow APW over the Late Triassic and provide an alternative interpretation for plateau rotation. The middle Newark pole is supported by positive fold and reversal tests, precluding remagnetization, and agrees well with the pole reported from the Norian Upper Shale Member of the Chinle Formation from east central New Mexico as well as the 214 Ma Manicouagan pole from Quebec. These poles provide a well-defined mean Norian reference pole for cratonic North America at 57.4°N 91.0°E A95=3.8°. Paleomagnetic poles from the Chinle Formation on the Colorado Plateau (Owl Rock Member, Church Rock Member, and our new result from the upper Chinle in Utah) are also well grouped, consistent with slow APW over the Norian, but give a mean pole position (57.7°N 65.6°E A95=2.5°) that differs significantly from the Norian pole for cratonic North America. The North American Norian poles can be closely reconciled by a 13.5° ± 3.5° correction for accumulated post-Triassic clockwise rotation of the Colorado Plateau associated with Laramide deformation and Cenozoic opening of the Rio Grande Rift. This estimate of Colorado Plateau rotation is consistent with a systematic discrepancy between plateau and cratonic poles for the Early Triassic, whereas available late Paleozoic and Jurassic poles are judged not to provide definitive constraints on plateau rotation. A revised Triassic and Early Jurassic APW path for North America shows that the virtual standstill in the Norian, the last 15 m.y. of the Triassic, was preceded and followed by intervals of fast (∼1°/m.y.) angular plate velocity.*
- Mirzaei,  M. , Housen, B. A. , Burmester, R. F. , and Foreman, B. Z. , (2021), Paleomagnetic results from Upper Triassic and Middle Jurassic strata of east-central New Mexico, and implication for North American apparent polar wander path: Tectonophysics, v. 811, p. 228872, doi:10.1016/J.TECTO.2021.228872. *New poles adjacent to the Colorado Plateau that will help to evaluate the rotation by comparing with non-rotated? near areas* They discussed CP rotation in the paper
